# Measuring salivary cortisol in wild carnivores (2022)
#### Tracy M. Montgomery, Julia R. Greenberg, Jessica L. Gunson, Kecil John, Zachary M. Laubach, Emily Nonnamaker, Erin S. Person, Heidi Rogers, Emily M. Ronis, Laura Smale, Katherine R. Steinfield, Robyn Strong, Kay E. Holekamp, Jacinta C. Beehner
#### Hormones and Behavior, 137: 105082
#### https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yhbeh.2021.105082.

Abstract: Salivary hormone analyses provide a useful alternative to fecal and urinary hormone analyses in non-invasive studies of behavioral endocrinology. Here, we use saliva to assess cortisol levels in a wild population of spotted hyenas (Crocuta crocuta), a gregarious carnivore living in complex social groups. We first describe a novel, non-invasive method of collecting saliva from juvenile hyenas and validate a salivary cortisol assay for use in this species. We then analyze over 260 saliva samples collected from nearly 70 juveniles to investigate the relationships between cortisol and temporal and social variables in these animals. We obtain some evidence of a bimodal daily rhythm with salivary cortisol concentrations dropping around dawn and dusk, times at which cub activity levels are changing substantially. We also find that dominant littermates have lower cortisol than singleton juveniles, but that cortisol does not vary with age, sex, or maternal social rank. Finally, we examine how social behaviors such as aggression or play affect salivary cortisol concentrations. We find that inflicting aggression on others was associated with lower cortisol concentrations. We hope that the detailed description of our methods provides wildlife researchers with the tools to measure salivary cortisol in other wild carnivores.

Keywords: Saliva; Cortisol; Glucocorticoids; Spotted hyenas; Crocuta crocuta; Daily rhythms; Hormone-behavior relationships
